To Sherlock Holmes she is always the woman.
I have seldom heard him mention her under any other name.
In his eyes she eclipses and predominates the whole of her sex.
It was not that he felt any emotion akin to love for Irene Adler.
All emotions, and that oneparticularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise but admirablybalanced mind.
He was, I take it, the most perfect reasoning andobserving machine that the world has seen, but as a lover he wouldhave placed himself in a false position.
He never spoke of the softerpassions, save with a gibe and a sneer.
They were admirable thingsfor the observerexcellent for drawing the veil from men's motivesand actions.
But for the trained reasoner to admit such intrusionsinto his own delicate and finely adjusted temperament was tointroduce a distracting factor which might throw a doubt upon all hismental results.
Grit in a sensitive instrument, or a crack in one ofhis own highpower lenses, would not be more disturbing than a strongemotion in a nature such as his.
And yet there was but one woman tohim, and that woman was the late Irene Adler, of dubious andquestionable memory.I had seen little of Holmes lately.
My marriage had drifted us away from each other.
My own complete happiness, and the homecentred interests which rise up around the man who first finds himself master of his own establishment, were sufficient to absorb all my attention, while Holmes, who loathed every form of society with his wholeBohemian soul, remained in our lodgings in Baker Street, buried amonghis old books, and alternating from week to week between cocaine andambition, the drowsiness of the drug, and the fierce energy of hisown keen nature.
He was still, as ever, deeply attracted by the studyof crime, and occupied his immense faculties and extraordinary powersof observation in following out those clues, and clearing up thosemysteries which had been abandoned as hopeless by the officialpolice.
From time to time I heard some vague account of his doingsof his summons to Odessa in the case of the Trepoff murder, of hisclearing up of the singular tragedy of the Atkinson brothers atTrincomalee, and finally of the mission which he had accomplished sodelicately and successfully for the reigning family of Holland.Beyond these signs of his activity, however, which I merely sharedwith all the readers of the daily press, I knew little of my formerfriend and companion.One nightit was on the twentieth of March, 1888I was returningfrom a journey to a patient (for I had now returned to civilpractice), when my way led me through Baker Street.
As I passed thewellremembered door, which must always be associated in my mind withmy wooing, and with the dark incidents of the Study in Scarlet, I wasseized with a keen desire to see Holmes again, and to know how he wasemploying his extraordinary powers.
His rooms were brilliantly lit,and, even as I looked up, I saw his tall, spare figure pass twice ina dark silhouette against the blind.
He was pacing the room swiftly,eagerly, with his head sunk upon his chest and his hands claspedbehind him.
To me, who knew his every mood and habit, his attitudeand manner told their own story.
He was at work again.
He had risenout of his drugcreated dreams and was hot upon the scent of some newproblem.
I rang the bell and was shown up to the chamber which hadformerly been in part my own.His manner was not effusive.
It seldom was but he was glad, I think,to see me.
With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly eye, he wavedme to an armchair, threw across his case of cigars, and indicated aspirit case and a gasogene in the corner.
Then he stood before thefire and looked me over in his singular introspective fashion.Wedlock suits you, he remarked.
I think, Watson, that you have puton seven and a half pounds since I saw you.Seven! I answered.Indeed, I should have thought a little more.
Just a trifle more, Ifancy, Watson.
And in practice again, I observe.
You did not tell methat you intended to go into harness.Then, how do you know?I see it, I deduce it.
How do I know that you have been gettingyourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy andcareless servant girl?My dear Holmes, said I, this is too much.
You would certainly havebeen burned, had you lived a few centuries ago.
It is true that I hada country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess, but as Ihave changed my clothes I can't imagine how you deduce it.
As to MaryJane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her notice, butthere, again, I fail to see how you work it out.He chuckled to himself and rubbed his long, nervous hands together.It is simplicity itself, said he my eyes tell me that on theinside of your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes it, theleather is scored by six almost parallel cuts.
Obviously they havebeen caused by someone who has very carelessly scraped round theedges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it.
Hence, yousee, my double deduction that you had been out in vile weather, andthat you had a particularly malignant bootslitting specimen of theLondon slavey.
As to your practice, if a gentleman walks into myrooms smelling of iodoform, with a black mark of nitrate of silverupon his right forefinger, and a bulge on the right side of histophat to show where he has secreted his stethoscope, I must bedull, indeed, if I do not pronounce him to be an active member of themedical profession.I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained hisprocess of deduction.
When I hear you give your reasons, Iremarked, the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculouslysimple that I could easily do it myself, though at each successiveinstance of your reasoning I am baffled until you explain yourprocess.
And yet I believe that my eyes are as good as yours.Quite so, he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing himselfdown into an armchair.
You see, but you do not observe.
Thedistinction is clear.
For example, you have frequently seen the stepswhich lead up from the hall to this room.Frequently.How often?Well, some hundreds of times.Then how many are there?How many? I don't know.Quite so! You have not observed.
And yet you have seen.
That is justmy point.
Now, I know that there are seventeen steps, because I haveboth seen and observed.
Bytheway, since you are interested in theselittle problems, and since you are good enough to chronicle one ortwo of my trifling experiences, you may be interested in this.
Hethrew over a sheet of thick, pinktinted notepaper which had beenlying open upon the table.
It came by the last post, said he.
Readit aloud.The note was undated, and without either signature or address.There will call upon you tonight, at a quarter to eight o'clock,it said, a gentleman who desires to consult you upon a matter of thevery deepest moment.
Your recent services to one of the royal housesof Europe have shown that you are one who may safely be trusted withmatters which are of an importance which can hardly be exaggerated.This account of you we have from all quarters received.
Be in yourchamber then at that hour, and do not take it amiss if your visitorwear a mask.This is indeed a mystery, I remarked.
What do you imagine that itmeans?I have no data yet.
It is a capital mistake to theorize before onehas data.
Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories,instead of theories to suit facts.
But the note itself.
What do youdeduce from it?I carefully examined the writing, and the paper upon which it waswritten.The man who wrote it was presumably well to do, I remarked,endeavouring to imitate my companion's processes.
Such paper couldnot be bought under half a crown a packet.
It is peculiarly strongand stiff.Peculiarthat is the very word, said Holmes.
It is not an Englishpaper at all.
Hold it up to the light.I did so, and saw a large E with a small g, a P, and a largeG with a small t woven into the texture of the paper.What do you make of that? asked Holmes.The name of the maker, no doubt or his monogram, rather.Not at all.
The 'G' with the small 't' stands for 'Gesellschaft,'which is the German for 'Company.' It is a customary contraction likeour 'Co.' 'P,' of course, stands for 'Papier.' Now for the 'Eg.' Letus glance at our Continental Gazetteer.
He took down a heavy brownvolume from his shelves.
Eglow, Eglonitzhere we are, Egria.
It isin a Germanspeaking countryin Bohemia, not far from Carlsbad.'Remarkable as being the scene of the death of Wallenstein, and forits numerous glassfactories and papermills.' Ha, ha, my boy, whatdo you make of that? His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great bluetriumphant cloud from his cigarette.The paper was made in Bohemia, I said.Precisely.
And the man who wrote the note is a German.
Do you notethe peculiar construction of the sentence'This account of you wehave from all quarters received.' A Frenchman or Russian could nothave written that.
It is the German who is so uncourteous to hisverbs.
It only remains, therefore, to discover what is wanted by thisGerman who writes upon Bohemian paper and prefers wearing a mask toshowing his face.
And here he comes, if I am not mistaken, to resolveall our doubts.As he spoke there was the sharp sound of horses' hoofs and gratingwheels against the curb, followed by a sharp pull at the bell.
Holmeswhistled.A pair, by the sound, said he.
Yes, he continued, glancing out ofthe window.
A nice little brougham and a pair of beauties.
A hundredand fifty guineas apiece.
There's money in this case, Watson, ifthere is nothing else.I think that I had better go, Holmes.Not a bit, Doctor.
Stay where you are.
I am lost without my Boswell.And this promises to be interesting.
It would be a pity to miss it.But your clientNever mind him.
I may want your help, and so may he.
Here he comes.Sit down in that armchair, Doctor, and give us your best attention.A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon the stairs and inthe passage, paused immediately outside the door.
Then there was aloud and authoritative tap.Come in! said Holmes.A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet sixinches in height, with the chest and limbs of a Hercules.
His dresswas rich with a richness which would, in England, be looked upon asakin to bad taste.
Heavy bands of astrakhan were slashed across thesleeves and fronts of his doublebreasted coat, while the deep bluecloak which was thrown over his shoulders was lined withflamecoloured silk and secured at the neck with a brooch whichconsisted of a single flaming beryl.
Boots which extended halfway uphis calves, and which were trimmed at the tops with rich brown fur,completed the impression of barbaric opulence which was suggested byhis whole appearance.
He carried a broadbrimmed hat in his hand,while he wore across the upper part of his face, extending down pastthe cheekbones, a black vizard mask, which he had apparently adjustedthat very moment, for his hand was still raised to it as he entered.From the lower part of the face he appeared to be a man of strongcharacter, with a thick, hanging lip, and a long, straight chinsuggestive of resolution pushed to the length of obstinacy.You had my note? he asked with a deep harsh voice and a stronglymarked German accent.
I told you that I would call.
He looked fromone to the other of us, as if uncertain which to address.Pray take a seat, said Holmes.
This is my friend and colleague,Dr.
Watson, who is occasionally good enough to help me in my cases.Whom have I the honour to address?You may address me as the Count Von Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman.
Iunderstand that this gentleman, your friend, is a man of honour anddiscretion, whom I may trust with a matter of the most extremeimportance.
If not, I should much prefer to communicate with youalone.I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me backinto my chair.
It is both, or none, said he.
You may say beforethis gentleman anything which you may say to me.The Count shrugged his broad shoulders.
Then I must begin, said he,by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years at the end ofthat time the matter will be of no importance.
At present it is nottoo much to say that it is of such weight it may have an influenceupon European history.I promise, said Holmes.And I.You will excuse this mask, continued our strange visitor.
Theaugust person who employs me wishes his agent to be unknown to you,and I may confess at once that the title by which I have just calledmyself is not exactly my own.I was aware of it, said Holmes dryly.The circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precaution has tobe taken to quench what might grow to be an immense scandal andseriously compromise one of the reigning families of Europe.
To speakplainly, the matter implicates the great House of Ormstein,hereditary kings of Bohemia.I was also aware of that, murmured Holmes, settling himself down inhis armchair and closing his eyes.Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at the languid,lounging figure of the man who had been no doubt depicted to him asthe most incisive reasoner and most energetic agent in Europe.
Holmesslowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at his giganticclient.If your Majesty would condescend to state your case, he remarked,I should be better able to advise you.The man sprang from his chair and paced up and down the room inuncontrollable agitation.
Then, with a gesture of desperation, hetore the mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground.
You areright, he cried I am the King.
Why should I attempt to concealit?Why, indeed? murmured Holmes.
Your Majesty had not spoken before Iwas aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich Sigismond vonOrmstein, Grand Duke of CasselFelstein, and hereditary King ofBohemia.But you can understand, said our strange visitor, sitting down oncemore and passing his hand over his high white forehead, you canunderstand that I am not accustomed to doing such business in my ownperson.
Yet the matter was so delicate that I could not confide it toan agent without putting myself in his power.
I have come incognitofrom Prague for the purpose of consulting you.Then, pray consult, said Holmes, shutting his eyes once more.The facts are briefly these Some five years ago, during a lengthyvisit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the wellknownadventuress, Irene Adler.
The name is no doubt familiar to you.Kindly look her up in my index, Doctor, murmured Holmes withoutopening his eyes.
For many years he had adopted a system of docketingall paragraphs concerning men and things, so that it was difficult toname a subject or a person on which he could not at once furnishinformation.
In this case I found her biography sandwiched in betweenthat of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a staffcommander who had writtena monograph upon the deepsea fishes.Let me see! said Holmes.
Hum! Born in New Jersey in the year 1858.Contraltohum! La Scala, hum! Prima donna Imperial Opera ofWarsawyes! Retired from operatic stageha! Living in Londonquiteso! Your Majesty, as I understand, became entangled with this youngperson, wrote her some compromising letters, and is now desirous ofgetting those letters back.Precisely so.
But howWas there a secret marriage?None.No legal papers or certificates?None.Then I fail to follow your Majesty.
If this young person shouldproduce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how is she toprove their authenticity?There is the writing.Pooh, pooh! Forgery.My private notepaper.Stolen.My own seal.Imitated.My photograph.Bought.We were both in the photograph.Oh, dear! That is very bad! Your Majesty has indeed committed anindiscretion.I was madinsane.You have compromised yourself seriously.I was only Crown Prince then.
I was young.
I am but thirty now.It must be recovered.We have tried and failed.Your Majesty must pay.
It must be bought.She will not sell.Stolen, then.Five attempts have been made.
Twice burglars in my pay ransacked herhouse.
Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled.
Twice she hasbeen waylaid.
There has been no result.No sign of it?Absolutely none.Holmes laughed.
It is quite a pretty little problem, said he.But a very serious one to me, returned the King reproachfully.Very, indeed.
And what does she propose to do with the photograph?To ruin me.But how?I am about to be married.So I have heard.To Clotilde Lothman von SaxeMeningen, second daughter of the Kingof Scandinavia.
You may know the strict principles of her family.
Sheis herself the very soul of delicacy.
A shadow of a doubt as to myconduct would bring the matter to an end.And Irene Adler?Threatens to send them the photograph.
And she will do it.
I knowthat she will do it.
You do not know her, but she has a soul ofsteel.
She has the face of the most beautiful of women, and the mindof the most resolute of men.
Rather than I should marry anotherwoman, there are no lengths to which she would not gonone.You are sure that she has not sent it yet?I am sure.And why?Because she has said that she would send it on the day when thebetrothal was publicly proclaimed.
That will be next Monday.Oh, then we have three days yet, said Holmes with a yawn.
That isvery fortunate, as I have one or two matters of importance to lookinto just at present.
Your Majesty will, of course, stay in Londonfor the present?Certainly.
You will find me at the Langham under the name of theCount Von Kramm.Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress.Pray do so.
I shall be all anxiety.Then, as to money?You have carte blanche.Absolutely?I tell you that I would give one of the provinces of my kingdom tohave that photograph.And for present expenses?The King took a heavy chamois leather bag from under his cloak andlaid it on the table.There are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in notes,he said.Holmes scribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his notebook and handedit to him.And Mademoiselle's address? he asked.Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St.
John's Wood.Holmes took a note of it.
One other question, said he.
Was thephotograph a cabinet?It was.Then, goodnight, your Majesty, and I trust that we shall soon havesome good news for you.
And goodnight, Watson, he added, as thewheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street.
If you will begood enough to call tomorrow afternoon at three o'clock I shouldlike to chat this little matter over with you.CHAPTER IIAt three o'clock precisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had notyet returned.
The landlady informed me that he had left the houseshortly after eight o'clock in the morning.
I sat down beside thefire, however, with the intention of awaiting him, however long hemight be.
I was already deeply interested in his inquiry, for, thoughit was surrounded by none of the grim and strange features which wereassociated with the two crimes which I have already recorded, still,the nature of the case and the exalted station of his client gave ita character of its own.
Indeed, apart from the nature of theinvestigation which my friend had on hand, there was something in hismasterly grasp of a situation, and his keen, incisive reasoning,which made it a pleasure to me to study his system of work, and tofollow the quick, subtle methods by which he disentangled the mostinextricable mysteries.
So accustomed was I to his invariable successthat the very possibility of his failing had ceased to enter into myhead.It was close upon four before the door opened, and a drunkenlookinggroom, illkempt and sidewhiskered, with an inflamed face anddisreputable clothes, walked into the room.
Accustomed as I was to myfriend's amazing powers in the use of disguises, I had to look threetimes before I was certain that it was indeed he.
With a nod hevanished into the bedroom, whence he emerged in five minutestweedsuited and respectable, as of old.
Putting his hands into hispockets, he stretched out his legs in front of the fire and laughedheartily for some minutes.Well, really! he cried, and then he choked and laughed again untilhe was obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in the chair.What is it?It's quite too funny.
I am sure you could never guess how I employedmy morning, or what I ended by doing.I can't imagine.
I suppose that you have been watching the habits,and perhaps the house, of Miss Irene Adler.Quite so but the sequel was rather unusual.
I will tell you,however.
I left the house a little after eight o'clock this morningin the character of a groom out of work.
There is a wonderfulsympathy and freemasonry among horsey men.
Be one of them, and youwill know all that there is to know.
I soon found Briony Lodge.
It isa bijou villa, with a garden at the back, but built out in frontright up to the road, two stories.
Chubb lock to the door.
Largesittingroom on the right side, well furnished, with long windowsalmost to the floor, and those preposterous English window fastenerswhich a child could open.
Behind there was nothing remarkable, savethat the passage window could be reached from the top of thecoachhouse.
I walked round it and examined it closely from everypoint of view, but without noting anything else of interest.I then lounged down the street and found, as I expected, that therewas a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of the garden.
Ilent the ostlers a hand in rubbing down their horses, and received inexchange twopence, a glass of half and half, two fills of shagtobacco, and as much information as I could desire about Miss Adler,to say nothing of half a dozen other people in the neighbourhood inwhom I was not in the least interested, but whose biographies I wascompelled to listen to.And what of Irene Adler? I asked.Oh, she has turned all the men's heads down in that part.
She is thedaintiest thing under a bonnet on this planet.
So say theSerpentinemews, to a man.
She lives quietly, sings at concerts,drives out at five every day, and returns at seven sharp for dinner.Seldom goes out at other times, except when she sings.
Has only onemale visitor, but a good deal of him.
He is dark, handsome, anddashing, never calls less than once a day, and often twice.
He is aMr.
Godfrey Norton, of the Inner Temple.
See the advantages of acabman as a confidant.
They had driven him home a dozen times fromSerpentinemews, and knew all about him.
When I had listened to allthey had to tell, I began to walk up and down near Briony Lodge oncemore, and to think over my plan of campaign.This Godfrey Norton was evidently an important factor in the matter.He was a lawyer.
That sounded ominous.
What was the relation betweenthem, and what the object of his repeated visits? Was she his client,his friend, or his mistress? If the former, she had probablytransferred the photograph to his keeping.
If the latter, it was lesslikely.
On the issue of this question depended whether I shouldcontinue my work at Briony Lodge, or turn my attention to thegentleman's chambers in the Temple.
It was a delicate point, and itwidened the field of my inquiry.
I fear that I bore you with thesedetails, but I have to let you see my little difficulties, if you areto understand the situation.I am following you closely, I answered.I was still balancing the matter in my mind when a hansom cab droveup to Briony Lodge, and a gentleman sprang out.
He was a remarkablyhandsome man, dark, aquiline, and moustachedevidently the man ofwhom I had heard.
He appeared to be in a great hurry, shouted to thecabman to wait, and brushed past the maid who opened the door withthe air of a man who was thoroughly at home.He was in the house about half an hour, and I could catch glimpsesof him in the windows of the sittingroom, pacing up and down,talking excitedly, and waving his arms.
Of her I could see nothing.Presently he emerged, looking even more flurried than before.
As hestepped up to the cab, he pulled a gold watch from his pocket andlooked at it earnestly, 'Drive like the devil,' he shouted, 'first toGross & Hankey's in Regent Street, and then to the Church of St.Monica in the Edgeware Road.
Half a guinea if you do it in twentyminutes!'Away they went, and I was just wondering whether I should not dowell to follow them when up the lane came a neat little landau, thecoachman with his coat only halfbuttoned, and his tie under his ear,while all the tags of his harness were sticking out of the buckles.It hadn't pulled up before she shot out of the hall door and into it.I only caught a glimpse of her at the moment, but she was a lovelywoman, with a face that a man might die for.'The Church of St.
Monica, John,' she cried, 'and half a sovereignif you reach it in twenty minutes.'This was quite too good to lose, Watson.
I was just balancingwhether I should run for it, or whether I should perch behind herlandau when a cab came through the street.
The driver looked twice atsuch a shabby fare, but I jumped in before he could object.
'TheChurch of St.
Monica,' said I, 'and half a sovereign if you reach itin twenty minutes.' It was twentyfive minutes to twelve, and ofcourse it was clear enough what was in the wind.My cabby drove fast.
I don't think I ever drove faster, but theothers were there before us.
The cab and the landau with theirsteaming horses were in front of the door when I arrived.
I paid theman and hurried into the church.
There was not a soul there save thetwo whom I had followed and a surpliced clergyman, who seemed to beexpostulating with them.
They were all three standing in a knot infront of the altar.
I lounged up the side aisle like any other idlerwho has dropped into a church.
Suddenly, to my surprise, the three atthe altar faced round to me, and Godfrey Norton came running as hardas he could towards me.'Thank God,' he cried.
'You'll do.
Come! Come!''What then?' I asked.'Come, man, come, only three minutes, or it won't be legal.'I was halfdragged up to the altar, and before I knew where I was Ifound myself mumbling responses which were whispered in my ear, andvouching for things of which I knew nothing, and generally assistingin the secure tying up of Irene Adler, spinster, to Godfrey Norton,bachelor.
It was all done in an instant, and there was the gentlemanthanking me on the one side and the lady on the other, while theclergyman beamed on me in front.
It was the most preposterousposition in which I ever found myself in my life, and it was thethought of it that started me laughing just now.
It seems that therehad been some informality about their license, that the clergymanabsolutely refused to marry them without a witness of some sort, andthat my lucky appearance saved the bridegroom from having to sallyout into the streets in search of a best man.
The bride gave me asovereign, and I mean to wear it on my watchchain in memory of theoccasion.This is a very unexpected turn of affairs, said I and what then?Well, I found my plans very seriously menaced.
It looked as if thepair might take an immediate departure, and so necessitate veryprompt and energetic measures on my part.
At the church door,however, they separated, he driving back to the Temple, and she toher own house.
'I shall drive out in the park at five as usual,' shesaid as she left him.
I heard no more.
They drove away in differentdirections, and I went off to make my own arrangements.Which are?Some cold beef and a glass of beer, he answered, ringing the bell.I have been too busy to think of food, and I am likely to be busierstill this evening.
By the way, Doctor, I shall want yourcooperation.I shall be delighted.You don't mind breaking the law?Not in the least.Nor running a chance of arrest?Not in a good cause.Oh, the cause is excellent!Then I am your man.I was sure that I might rely on you.But what is it you wish?When Mrs.
Turner has brought in the tray I will make it clear toyou.
Now, he said as he turned hungrily on the simple fare that ourlandlady had provided, I must discuss it while I eat, for I have notmuch time.
It is nearly five now.
In two hours we must be on thescene of action.
Miss Irene, or Madame, rather, returns from herdrive at seven.
We must be at Briony Lodge to meet her.And what then?You must leave that to me.
I have already arranged what is to occur.There is only one point on which I must insist.
You must notinterfere, come what may.
You understand?I am to be neutral?To do nothing whatever.
There will probably be some smallunpleasantness.
Do not join in it.
It will end in my being conveyedinto the house.
Four or five minutes afterwards the sittingroomwindow will open.
You are to station yourself close to that openwindow.Yes.You are to watch me, for I will be visible to you.Yes.And when I raise my handsoyou will throw into the room what Igive you to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of fire.You quite follow me?Entirely.It is nothing very formidable, he said, taking a long cigarshapedroll from his pocket.
It is an ordinary plumber's smokerocket,fitted with a cap at either end to make it selflighting.
Your taskis confined to that.
When you raise your cry of fire, it will betaken up by quite a number of people.
You may then walk to the end ofthe street, and I will rejoin you in ten minutes.
I hope that I havemade myself clear?I am to remain neutral, to get near the window, to watch you, and atthe signal to throw in this object, then to raise the cry of fire,and to wait you at the corner of the street.Precisely.Then you may entirely rely on me.That is excellent.
I think, perhaps, it is almost time that Iprepare for the new role I have to play.He disappeared into his bedroom and returned in a few minutes in thecharacter of an amiable and simpleminded Nonconformist clergyman.His broad black hat, his baggy trousers, his white tie, hissympathetic smile, and general look of peering and benevolentcuriosity were such as Mr.
John Hare alone could have equalled.
Itwas not merely that Holmes changed his costume.
His expression, hismanner, his very soul seemed to vary with every fresh part that heassumed.
The stage lost a fine actor, even as science lost an acutereasoner, when he became a specialist in crime.It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street, and it stillwanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves in SerpentineAvenue.
It was already dusk, and the lamps were just being lighted aswe paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge, waiting for the comingof its occupant.
The house was just such as I had pictured it fromSherlock Holmes' succinct description, but the locality appeared tobe less private than I expected.
On the contrary, for a small streetin a quiet neighbourhood, it was remarkably animated.
There was agroup of shabbily dressed men smoking and laughing in a corner, ascissorsgrinder with his wheel, two guardsmen who were flirting witha nursegirl, and several welldressed young men who were lounging upand down with cigars in their mouths.You see, remarked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front of thehouse, this marriage rather simplifies matters.
The photographbecomes a doubleedged weapon now.
The chances are that she would beas averse to its being seen by Mr.
Godfrey Norton, as our client isto its coming to the eyes of his princess.
Now the question isWhereare we to find the photograph?Where, indeed?It is most unlikely that she carries it about with her.
It iscabinet size.
Too large for easy concealment about a woman's dress.She knows that the King is capable of having her waylaid andsearched.
Two attempts of the sort have already been made.
We maytake it, then, that she does not carry it about with her.Where, then?Her banker or her lawyer.
There is that double possibility.
But I aminclined to think neither.
Women are naturally secretive, and theylike to do their own secreting.
Why should she hand it over to anyoneelse? She could trust her own guardianship, but she could not tellwhat indirect or political influence might be brought to bear upon abusiness man.
Besides, remember that she had resolved to use itwithin a few days.
It must be where she can lay her hands upon it.
Itmust be in her own house.But it has twice been burgled.Pshaw! They did not know how to look.But how will you look?I will not look.What then?I will get her to show me.But she will refuse.She will not be able to.
But I hear the rumble of wheels.
It is hercarriage.
Now carry out my orders to the letter.As he spoke the gleam of the sidelights of a carriage came round thecurve of the avenue.
It was a smart little landau which rattled up tothe door of Briony Lodge.
As it pulled up, one of the loafing men atthe corner dashed forward to open the door in the hope of earning acopper, but was elbowed away by another loafer, who had rushed upwith the same intention.
A fierce quarrel broke out, which wasincreased by the two guardsmen, who took sides with one of theloungers, and by the scissorsgrinder, who was equally hot upon theother side.
A blow was struck, and in an instant the lady, who hadstepped from her carriage, was the centre of a little knot of flushedand struggling men, who struck savagely at each other with theirfists and sticks.
Holmes dashed into the crowd to protect the ladybut just as he reached her he gave a cry and dropped to the ground,with the blood running freely down his face.
At his fall theguardsmen took to their heels in one direction and the loungers inthe other, while a number of betterdressed people, who had watchedthe scuffle without taking part in it, crowded in to help the ladyand to attend to the injured man.
Irene Adler, as I will still callher, had hurried up the steps but she stood at the top with hersuperb figure outlined against the lights of the hall, looking backinto the street.Is the poor gentleman much hurt? she asked.He is dead, cried several voices.No, no, there's life in him! shouted another.
But he'll be gonebefore you can get him to hospital.He's a brave fellow, said a woman.
They would have had the lady'spurse and watch if it hadn't been for him.
They were a gang, and arough one, too.
Ah, he's breathing now.He can't lie in the street.
May we bring him in, marm?Surely.
Bring him into the sittingroom.
There is a comfortablesofa.
This way, please!Slowly and solemnly he was borne into Briony Lodge and laid out inthe principal room, while I still observed the proceedings from mypost by the window.
The lamps had been lit, but the blinds had notbeen drawn, so that I could see Holmes as he lay upon the couch.
I donot know whether he was seized with compunction at that moment forthe part he was playing, but I know that I never felt more heartilyashamed of myself in my life than when I saw the beautiful creatureagainst whom I was conspiring, or the grace and kindliness with whichshe waited upon the injured man.
And yet it would be the blackesttreachery to Holmes to draw back now from the part which he hadintrusted to me.
I hardened my heart, and took the smokerocket fromunder my ulster.
After all, I thought, we are not injuring her.
Weare but preventing her from injuring another.Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a man whois in need of air.
A maid rushed across and threw open the window.
Atthe same instant I saw him raise his hand and at the signal I tossedmy rocket into the room with a cry of Fire! The word was no soonerout of my mouth than the whole crowd of spectators, well dressed andillgentlemen, ostlers, and servantmaidsjoined in a generalshriek of Fire! Thick clouds of smoke curled through the room andout at the open window.
I caught a glimpse of rushing figures, and amoment later the voice of Holmes from within assuring them that itwas a false alarm.
Slipping through the shouting crowd I made my wayto the corner of the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to findmy friend's arm in mine, and to get away from the scene of uproar.
Hewalked swiftly and in silence for some few minutes until we hadturned down one of the quiet streets which lead towards the EdgewareRoad.You did it very nicely, Doctor, he remarked.
Nothing could havebeen better.
It is all right.You have the photograph?I know where it is.And how did you find out?She showed me, as I told you she would.I am still in the dark.I do not wish to make a mystery, said he, laughing.
The matter wasperfectly simple.
You, of course, saw that everyone in the street wasan accomplice.
They were all engaged for the evening.I guessed as much.Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in thepalm of my hand.
I rushed forward, fell down, clapped my hand to myface, and became a piteous spectacle.
It is an old trick.That also I could fathom.Then they carried me in.
She was bound to have me in.
What elsecould she do? And into her sittingroom, which was the very roomwhich I suspected.
It lay between that and her bedroom, and I wasdetermined to see which.
They laid me on a couch, I motioned for air,they were compelled to open the window, and you had your chance.How did that help you?It was allimportant.
When a woman thinks that her house is on fire,her instinct is at once to rush to the thing which she values most.It is a perfectly overpowering impulse, and I have more than oncetaken advantage of it.
In the case of the Darlington substitutionscandal it was of use to me, and also in the Arnsworth Castlebusiness.
A married woman grabs at her baby an unmarried one reachesfor her jewelbox.
Now it was clear to me that our lady of today hadnothing in the house more precious to her than what we are in questof.
She would rush to secure it.
The alarm of fire was admirablydone.
The smoke and shouting were enough to shake nerves of steel.She responded beautifully.
The photograph is in a recess behind asliding panel just above the right bellpull.
She was there in aninstant, and I caught a glimpse of it as she halfdrew it out.
When Icried out that it was a false alarm, she replaced it, glanced at therocket, rushed from the room, and I have not seen her since.
I rose,and, making my excuses, escaped from the house.
I hesitated whetherto attempt to secure the photograph at once but the coachman hadcome in, and as he was watching me narrowly it seemed safer to wait.A little overprecipitance may ruin all.And now? I asked.Our quest is practically finished.
I shall call with the Kingtomorrow, and with you, if you care to come with us.
We will beshown into the sittingroom to wait for the lady, but it is probablethat when she comes she may find neither us nor the photograph.
Itmight be a satisfaction to his Majesty to regain it with his ownhands.And when will you call?At eight in the morning.
She will not be up, so that we shall have aclear field.
Besides, we must be prompt, for this marriage may mean acomplete change in her life and habits.
I must wire to the Kingwithout delay.We had reached Baker Street and had stopped at the door.
He wassearching his pockets for the key when someone passing saidGoodnight, Mister Sherlock Holmes.There were several people on the pavement at the time, but thegreeting appeared to come from a slim youth in an ulster who hadhurried by.I've heard that voice before, said Holmes, staring down the dimlylit street.
Now, I wonder who the deuce that could have been.CHAPTER IIII slept at Baker Street that night, and we were engaged upon ourtoast and coffee in the morning when the King of Bohemia rushed intothe room.You have really got it! he cried, grasping Sherlock Holmes byeither shoulder and looking eagerly into his face.Not yet.But you have hopes?I have hopes.Then, come.
I am all impatience to be gone.We must have a cab.No, my brougham is waiting.Then that will simplify matters.
We descended and started off oncemore for Briony Lodge.Irene Adler is married, remarked Holmes.Married! When?Yesterday.But to whom?To an English lawyer named Norton.But she could not love him.I am in hopes that she does.And why in hopes?Because it would spare your Majesty all fear of future annoyance.
Ifthe lady loves her husband, she does not love your Majesty.
If shedoes not love your Majesty, there is no reason why she shouldinterfere with your Majesty's plan.It is true.
And yetWell! I wish she had been of my own station!What a queen she would have made! He relapsed into a moody silence,which was not broken until we drew up in Serpentine Avenue.The door of Briony Lodge was open, and an elderly woman stood uponthe steps.
She watched us with a sardonic eye as we stepped from thebrougham.Mr.
Sherlock Holmes, I believe? said she.I am Mr.
Holmes, answered my companion, looking at her with aquestioning and rather startled gaze.Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely to call.
She leftthis morning with her husband by the 5.15 train from Charing Crossfor the Continent.What! Sherlock Holmes staggered back, white with chagrin andsurprise.
Do you mean that she has left England?Never to return.And the papers? asked the King hoarsely.
All is lost.We shall see.
He pushed past the servant and rushed into thedrawingroom, followed by the King and myself.
The furniture wasscattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves and opendrawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them before herflight.
Holmes rushed at the bellpull, tore back a small slidingshutter, and, plunging in his hand, pulled out a photograph and aletter.
The photograph was of Irene Adler herself in evening dress,the letter was superscribed to Sherlock Holmes, Esq.
To be left tillcalled for.
My friend tore it open and we all three read ittogether.
It was dated at midnight of the preceding night and ran inthis wayMy dear Mr.
Sherlock HolmesYou really did it very well.
You took me in completely.
Until afterthe alarm of fire, I had not a suspicion.
But then, when I found howI had betrayed myself, I began to think.
I had been warned againstyou months ago.
I had been told that if the King employed an agent itwould certainly be you.
And your address had been given me.
Yet, withall this, you made me reveal what you wanted to know.
Even after Ibecame suspicious, I found it hard to think evil of such a dear, kindold clergyman.
But, you know, I have been trained as an actressmyself.
Male costume is nothing new to me.
I often take advantage ofthe freedom which it gives.
I sent John, the coachman, to watch you,ran up stairs, got into my walkingclothes, as I call them, and camedown just as you departed.Well, I followed you to your door, and so made sure that I wasreally an object of interest to the celebrated Mr.
Sherlock Holmes.Then I, rather imprudently, wished you goodnight, and started forthe Temple to see my husband.We both thought the best resource was flight, when pursued by soformidable an antagonist so you will find the nest empty when youcall tomorrow.
As to the photograph, your client may rest in peace.I love and am loved by a better man than he.
The King may do what hewill without hindrance from one whom he has cruelly wronged.
I keepit only to safeguard myself, and to preserve a weapon which willalways secure me from any steps which he might take in the future.
Ileave a photograph which he might care to possess and I remain, dearMr.
Sherlock Holmes,Very truly yours,Irene Norton, née Adler.What a womanoh, what a woman! cried the King of Bohemia, when wehad all three read this epistle.
Did I not tell you how quick andresolute she was? Would she not have made an admirable queen? Is itnot a pity that she was not on my level? From what I have seen of the lady she seems indeed to be on a verydifferent level to your Majesty, said Holmes coldly.
I am sorrythat I have not been able to bring your Majesty's business to a moresuccessful conclusion.On the contrary, my dear sir, cried the King nothing could bemore successful.
I know that her word is inviolate.
The photograph isnow as safe as if it were in the fire.I am glad to hear your Majesty say so.I am immensely indebted to you.
Pray tell me in what way I canreward you.
This ring He slipped an emerald snake ring from hisfinger and held it out upon the palm of his hand.Your Majesty has something which I should value even more highly,said Holmes.You have but to name it.This photograph!The King stared at him in amazement.Irene's photograph! he cried.
Certainly, if you wish it.I thank your Majesty.
Then there is no more to be done in thematter.
I have the honour to wish you a very goodmorning.
He bowed,and, turning away without observing the hand which the King hadstretched out to him, he set off in my company for his chambers.And that was how a great scandal threatened to affect the kingdom ofBohemia, and how the best plans of Mr.
Sherlock Holmes were beaten bya woman's wit.
He used to make merry over the cleverness of women,but I have not heard him do it of late.
And when he speaks of IreneAdler, or when he refers to her photograph, it is always under thehonourable title of the woman.THE REDHEADED LEAGUEI had called upon my friend, Mr.
Sherlock Holmes, one day in theautumn of last year and found him in deep conversation with a verystout, floridfaced, elderly gentleman with fiery red hair.
With anapology for my intrusion, I was about to withdraw when Holmes pulledme abruptly into the room and closed the door behind me.You could not possibly have come at a better time, my dear Watson,he said cordially.I was afraid that you were engaged.So I am.
Very much so.Then I can wait in the next room.Not at all.
This gentleman, Mr.
Wilson, has been my partner andhelper in many of my most successful cases, and I have no doubt thathe will be of the utmost use to me in yours also.The stout gentleman half rose from his chair and gave a bob ofgreeting, with a quick little questioning glance from his smallfatencircled eyes.Try the settee, said Holmes, relapsing into his armchair andputting his fingertips together, as was his custom when in judicialmoods.
I know, my dear Watson, that you share my love of all that isbizarre and outside the conventions and humdrum routine of everydaylife.
You have shown your relish for it by the enthusiasm which hasprompted you to chronicle, and, if you will excuse my saying so,somewhat to embellish so many of my own little adventures.Your cases have indeed been of the greatest interest to me, Iobserved.You will remember that I remarked the other day, just before we wentinto the very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Sutherland, thatfor strange effects and extraordinary combinations we must go to lifeitself, which is always far more daring than any effort of theimagination.A proposition which I took the liberty of doubting.You did, Doctor, but none the less you must come round to my view,for otherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you until yourreason breaks down under them and acknowledges me to be right.
Now,Mr.
Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call upon me thismorning, and to begin a narrative which promises to be one of themost singular which I have listened to for some time.
You have heardme remark that the strangest and most unique things are very oftenconnected not with the larger but with the smaller crimes, andoccasionally, indeed, where there is room for doubt whether anypositive crime has been committed.
As far as I have heard it isimpossible for me to say whether the present case is an instance ofcrime or not, but the course of events is certainly among the mostsingular that I have ever listened to.
Perhaps, Mr.
Wilson, you wouldhave the great kindness to recommence your narrative.
I ask you notmerely because my friend Dr.
Watson has not heard the opening partbut also because the peculiar nature of the story makes me anxious tohave every possible detail from your lips.
As a rule, when I haveheard some slight indication of the course of events, I am able toguide myself by the thousands of other similar cases which occur tomy memory.
In the present instance I am forced to admit that thefacts are, to the best of my belief, unique.